---
title: "Bad working title: population genetics of independent gametophytes using genotyping-by-sequencing"
author: Aaron M. Duffy, Don R. Farrar, Paul G. Wolf
---

ABSTRACT
========

INTRODUCTION
============
Emphasize how little we truly know, how much is based on little data, and how much is based on untested assumptions.

The "typical" fern lifecycle consists of alternating independent generations of diploid sporophytes and haploid gametophytes. The sporophyte is generally larger, longer-lived and has a more complex structure than the gametophyte [@Sheffield1994-jv] and their drastically different morphologies can result in different environmental or habitat requirements. However, in order for the entire lifecycle to occur, the same site must be suitable for the spore to germinate, the gametophyte to survive to produce gametes, the gametes to unite, and the sporophyte to survive to produce spores. All of these diverse processes must be supported in one location, though not necessarily at the same time [@Peck1990-th]. Some fern species are capable of asexual reproduction and subsequent dispersal in one or both generations, allowing individuals, clones, or colonies of either sporophytes or gametophytes to persist in places where the other cannot. This ability for gametophytes to survive and spread, even if the habitat in a particular time or place is not suitable for sporophytes may play an important role in long-distance fern dispersal and colonization [@Sato1982-uh; @Dassler2001-zv; @Ebihara2013-iq].

It is not noteworthy to observe sporophytes and not find gametophytes growing at the same site (since the gametophytes tend to be shorter-lived, more difficult to identify, and frequently overlooked), so examples demonstrating differences in habitat requirements between life stages are typically gametophyte colonies found growing independent of sporophytes. For example, sporophytes and gametophytes of _Callistopteris baueriana_ (Endl.) Copel. are found in wet, high altitude forests of the Hawaiian islands, whereas, only gametophytes are found at drier, lower locations [@Dassler1997-vo]. Several other species have gametophytes found over a larger geographic or environmental range than the sporophytes, including _Trichomanes speciosum_ Willd. (Hymenophyllaceae) in the British Isles, Europe and Canary Islands [@Ratcliffe1993-rx; @Rumsey1998-yx; @Rumsey1999-au; @Kingston2005-wl], _Hymenophyllum wrightii_ Bosch (Hymenophyllaceae) on the northwest coast of North America [@Persson1958-vl; @Iwatsuki1961-wa; @Taylor1967-yn; @Duffy2015-ol], and _Crepidomanes schmidtianum_ (Zenker ex Taschner) K. Iwats. (Hymenophyllaceae) in Japan and Korea [@Lee2014-df]. All of these ferns have gametophytes that are long-lived and capable of clonal growth and asexual reproduction.
NOTE-Use terminology from [@Pinson2017-lc] "separation of generations"

_Crepidomanes intricatum_ (Farrar) Ebihara & Weakley (Hymenophyllaceae), found as gametophytes throughout the Appalachian Mountains in eastern North America is a particularly interesting example of this phenomenon because no sporophytes have ever been found. The gametophytes are single-cell wide, branching filaments that produce asexual gemmae and grow in tangled clusters ranging from a few individuals to dense colonies covering several square meters (Figure 1).

_C. intricatum_ has rbcL sequence identical to Asian _C. schmidtianum_ sporophytes [@Ebihara2008-sx], suggesting a close relationship, (relatively recently formed species or not a separate species or possibly the result of hybridization?) and it has been hypothesized that _C. intricatum_ may not be a separate species, but rather another example of a species with gametophyte range extending beyond the range of the sporophytes. It is not clear whether North American gametophytes are the same species or possibly the result of hybridization involving _C. schmidtianum_, and this relationship does not explain the apparent lack of ability to produce sporophytes in North America.

Citations for temperature moderated habitats of _C. intricatum_: Farrar 1998, Chambers and Emery 2016.

_D. petersii_ has been found growing up to 50km from the nearest sporophyte population [@Farrar1992-pm; @Bray1996-hp]. Even though the gametophytes of _D. petersii_ and _C. intricatum_ are identical, can both form independent gametophyte populations and have overlapping geographic ranges, only recently have genetic tools been used to determine the species identity of unknown gametophytes [@Pinson2017-eu]. ([@Farrar1992-pm] -- they used isozymes on 30 samples from east of the Mississippi river that did not have _D. petersii_ or _V. boschiana_ sporophytes and they all had the _C. intricatum_ banding pattern)
[@Bray1996-hp] for apparent example of assuming independent gametophyte populations are _D. petersii_ based on their presence in a region where the sporophytes have been identified.

[@Ebihara2009-sg] for example of complex hybridization relationships in independent gametophytes of _Vandenboschia_ species. They hypothesize that gametes from gametophytes that cannot produce sporophytes hybridize with another species. They found two samples that appeared to have 2 different taxa growing intertwined... so it isn't too far-fetched to think that some of my samples could contain individuals of 2 species.

The three species in this study are related closely enough that they were once all included in the genus _Trichomanes_ ([@Ebihara2006-ce; @Ebihara2007-kq] and their gametophytes cannot be distinguished morphologically.

The 5 _C. intricatum_ populations from two sites tested in Ehibara et al 2008 had no variation in 1206bp of rbcL. They differed from Asian _C. schmidtianum_ at 0-3 basepairs. We cannot say anything about whether there is rbcL variation within _C. intricatum_ (small sample size). There appears to be variation within _C. schmidtianum_ but we don't have enough info to understand how that variation is distributed. Other examples of ferns with North American / Japanese disjuncts have higher levels of rbcL sequence divergence consistent with separation "long before the last glacial age" while the divergence between _C. intricatum_ and _C. schmidtianum_ is more consistent with a recent separation.

Ebihara et al 2013- In a survey in Japan, where fern distributions are well mapped. Most cordiform gametophytes had sporophytes growing at the same site or had been reported within 10km. But non-cordiform gametophytes were often found >10km from the nearest known sporophytes and gametophytes for 3 species were found that are not known to occur as sporophytes in Japan.

Previous attempts to explore population genetics of independent gametophytes used isozymes or cpDNA. Farrar found no isozyme variation in _C. intricatum_, and we failed to find sufficiently variable cpDNA markers. Is this the first attempt to look at population genetics of a fern with independent gametophytes using DNA rather than allozymes? No. Rumsey 1996 used cpDNA in European T. speciosum.

From Pinson et al. 2017:
  "Currently, the assumption is that the distributions of widespread gametophyte-only taxa are the result of ancient spore dispersal that occurred before these ferns lost their sporophyte counterparts."

NOTES-Rumsey et al 1999 suggest that since habitat is sparsely distributed, "primary colonization" events are likely rare and if the time between arrival at a specific site of gemmae or spores is long, the ones that got to the site first could exclude secondary colonists. That doesn't seem to be the case for _C. intricatum_ but this is based on assumptions that are untested in _C. intricatum_. Rumsey et al 1998 looked at genetic diversity in T. speciosum at the northernmost limits of its range in Scotland and found no allozyme variation within populations (one reason why we assumed T. intricatum collections would be clones--they found no variation within sites) and several multilocus genotypes in the area. Most genotypes were limited to a few locations while 2 were widespread. In Europe (Rumsey et al 1998b) they did find variation within some ~5% of populations, and 11% of sites (their site and population definitions differ from mine) and one collection appeared to be a combination (their data better support it being an individual with a mix of the two phenotypes rather than a mix of individuals with different phenotypes) of 2 multi-locus phenotypes. Similar to what I found in some cases, they found some very dissimilar clones growing close together (within meters). They did an analysis similar to IBD and found no correlation of geographic proximity and phenotype similarity. Their results for central Europe are relevant to my study because this is the portion of T. speciosum's range where sporophytes are absent. In that region they found "considerable overall genetic variation" with variation "partitioned primarily between, not within, sites" and no IBD. They determined that the patterns of variation were compatible with 1) multiple independent colonization events, 2) sexual recombination among just a few colonists, or 3) a combination... so pretty much any of the possible hypotheses.
......


Dispersal of gemmae, fragments of gametophyte filament or even entire gametophytes.

  * What we know about _C. intricatum_ and other filmies in north america. Be sure to include something about how gametophytes found growing near sporophytes are assumed to be the same species as the sporophyte, whereas gametophytes found growing without sporophytes nearby are assumed to be _C. intricatum_ and individual patches are assumed to represent single clones.
  * Hypotheses for how _C. intricatum_ arrived at its current distribution
  * What we know about _C. intricatum_ genetics.
  * GBS
  * Goals of project:
    * Using genotyping-by-sequencing on independent gametophytes collected from throughout the Eastern US to 1) identify gametophyte samples to species and 2) explore the population genetics of _C. intricatum_ gametophytes at different scales
    * Evaluate hypotheses about how these populations were established and spread


METHODS
=======

## Sampling

50 suspected _C. intricatum_, _D. petersii_, or _V. boschiana_ gametophyte samples, one _D. petersii_ sporophyte sample, and three _V. boschiana_ sporophyte samples collected between 1965 and 2007 were selected to represent much of the known geographic range of _C. intricatum_ (Figure 3). Samples included gametophytes from previously glaciated areas, from multiple sites within some geographic regions, and from multiple patches within some sites. In addition, multiple DNA samples were extracted from some collections to look for variation within presumed clones (Table 1, Table 2).

## DNA extraction

Because of the small size of individual gametophytes and their tangled filamentous growth, each sample represents many individuals that were growing in close contact with each other (presumably but not necessarily clones) in <1 square-cm of silica-dried gametophyte mat. Bryophytes, lichen, sand, and other contaminants were manually separated from the gametophyte tissue under 20X magnification. DNA was extracted from 2--80 mg of cleaned tissue using a CTAB protocol [@Doyle1987-dp] with the following modifications to the cell disruption process. Samples were ground in CTAB buffer in 1.5mL tubes using a pestle attached to an electric drill on its slowest speed setting. While grinding, the tube was bathed in ice and pressure on the drill was applied in 1 second pulses to avoid heating the sample. For samples with less than 10 mg of tissue, 10--50 mg of autoclaved sand was added to improve grinding. Each sample was ground in three rounds of approximately 100 pulses with 100 uL of CTAB buffer in the first round and an additional 200uL added in subsequent rounds (500 uL total). After extraction the DNA was quantified using a Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA).

## Library preparation and Illumina sequencing

The GBS library was prepared according to an established double-digest restriction site-associated DNA sequencing (ddRADseq) protocol [@Gompert2012-ir; @Parchman2012-qm] using restriction enzymes EcoR1 and Mse1. PCR amplification steps were performed using iProof high-fidelity DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs) to minimize PCR error. To maximize the number of homogeneous loci across samples, pooled samples were size selected using Blue Pippen (Sage Science, Beverly, Massachusetts, USA), retaining loci between 250--350 bp. Samples were run on a single lane of Illumina HiSeq 2500 with 100 bp single-end sequencing at the Genome Sequencing and Analysis Facility at University of Texas.

## Identifying loci and calling genotypes

Raw Illumina reads were inspected for quality using fastQC [@Andrews2010-yx] and analyzed with ipyRAD v.0.7.1 [@Eaton2014-rr] using default settings except as noted below. Reads were sorted by barcode allowing up to two mismatched bases in the barcode sequence, filtered to remove low quality bases and reads with excessive low quality bases, and trimmed to remove Illumina adapter sequences.

To determine the appropriate clustering threshold for _de novo_ assembly of loci, clustering was performed over a range of threshold values from 0.95 down to 0.80. Higher values risk splitting alleles of a single locus into separate clusters, whereas lower values risk combining paralogs into single clusters. At higher threshold values the average number of clusters in _V. boschiana_ sporophyte samples is higher than in suspected _V. boschiana_ gametophyte samples, as would be expected if the ploidy level of the sporophytes is greater than the gametophytes. As the threshold values decrease the average number of clusters in sporophyte and gametophyte samples become similar, suggesting that multiple alleles in the sporophyte samples are being combined into loci. A threshold value of 0.85 was selected as a high value where the number of clusters in _V. boschiana_ sporophyte and gametophyte samples are similar (Figure 4).

Because allozyme studies suggest that _C. intricatum_ gametophytes are diploid [@Farrar1985-nm], samples were treated as diploid for estimating heterozygosity and error rates, and genotype calling in ipyRAD.

Each 35--100 bp locus identified by ipyRAD may contain multiple SNPs. To avoid using tightly linked SNPs, ipyRAD provides output files with genotypes from 1 randomly selected SNP per locus (.ustr format). However, this random sampling takes place after loci have been filtered for minimum sample coverage, so some SNPs may not have the requested minimum sample coverage even though the locus they are within does, resulting in higher than expected levels of missing data. Also, because the SNP from each locus is selected randomly at the time the output file is generated, multiple ipyRAD datasets from runs with increasing minimum sample coverage values may result in datasets that are not subsets of each other. To ensure that all the analyses in this study were based on subsets of the same data and only included SNPs with the desired minimum sample coverage, we used ipyRAD to generate a dataset of loci with coverage in six samples and filtered that "base ipyRAD dataset" to the desired minimum sample coverages using a custom python script.

## Separating samples by species

To group samples by species, we generated three datasets from the base ipyRAD dataset including all 54 samples and loci present in at least 33%, 50%, and 66% of samples, to balance the risks of using large numbers of loci with much missing data against the risks of using very few loci with high sample coverage (Table 3). Each dataset was analyzed using Structure [@Pritchard2000-ek] with 3 clusters to determine whether each gametophyte sample:
  1. was consistently assigned to a cluster with the _V. boschiana_ sporophytes or _D. petersii_ sporophyte (suggesting that it is likely a gametophyte of one of those species),
  2. was consistently assigned to a cluster without sporophytes (suggesting that it is likely a gametophyte of _C. intricatum_), or
  3. was not consistently assigned to any one cluster (suggesting that it may include a mixture of more than one species of gametophyte, that it may contain hybrid gametophytes, or that there is not sufficient genetic signal to consistently make an assignment).

To compare with species assignments from Structure, neighbor-joining Euclidean distance trees were generated with the adagenet package in R [@Jombart2008-sq; @Jombart2011-zo] with bootstrap values calculated using the poppr R package [@Kamvar2014-de].

Mean observed heterozygosity levels in gametophytes of each species were compared using ANOVA with Tukey HSD post hoc comparisons, and loci were tested for deviation from Hardy Weinberg equilibrium in R.

## Investigating genetic variation in _C. intricatum_

To explore genetic variation in _C. intricatum_, gametophyte samples assigned as _C. intricatum_ were analyzed alone and in combination with gametophytes assigned as Unknown. Nine samples with low read counts (fewer than 1 million cleaned and quality filtered reads) were removed from the analysis to reduce the level of missing data and risk of mis-called genotypes due to missing alleles.

To determine if the genetic signal from _V. boschiana_ and _D. petersii_ in the potentially mixed Unknown samples could be removed bioinformatically, allowing the _C. intricatum_ genetic signal to be analyzed, loci were identified as "_Crepidomanes_ loci" or "Non-_Crepidomanes_ loci" based on whether they were present in any sample assigned as _D. petersii_ or _V. boschiana_. We hypothesized that removing these non-_Crepidomanes_ loci from a sample with mixed genetic signal would remove loci specific to _D. petersii_ or _V. boschiana_ as well as loci shared between those species and _C. intricatum_, leaving mostly loci unique to _C. intricatum_. Four subsets of the data were generated from the base dataset, with and without Unknown samples, and with and without non-_Crepidomanes_ loci, each using a minimum sample coverage cutoff of 50% (Table 3). Patterns of genetic variation were analyzed using Structure, neighbor-joining Euclidean distance trees, and minimum spanning networks. Isolation by distance was tested using Mantel tests and Pearson's product-moment correlation with adagenet in R, and genetic distances were compared at different geographic scales.

RESULTS
=======

## Illumina sequencing data

The sequenced dataset consisted of approximately 278 million reads. An analysis of the raw reads using fastQC [@Andrews2010-yx] raised no significant quality issues. 88% of reads matched one of the expected barcodes (allowing up to 2 mismatches) with 4.4 million mean reads per barcode. Reads per sample ranged from 120000--11000000. Most samples were collected in 1965 (6 samples), 1981-1982 (20 samples), and 2005-2007 (25 samples), and read counts for samples from these three time periods differed (F=3.351, df=2, p=0.043). Samples from 1965 averaged 1/4th as many reads (Tukey HSD adjusted p=0.039) but samples from 1981-1982 had similar numbers of reads to recently collected samples (Tukey HSD adjusted p=0.980).

## Separating samples by species

Structure runs using all samples and loci with 33, 50, and 66% sample coverage resulted in similar sample groupings despite the differences in numbers of loci and levels of missing data in each dataset. Gametophyte samples that were consistently assigned to the group without sporophytes (probability of assignment >= 0.900 and lower bound of the 90% confidence interval >= 0.800) in all three Structure analyses were classified as _C. intricatum_ (29 samples). Gametophyte samples consistently assigned to a group containing sporophytes (probability of assignment >= 0.900) in all three datasets were assigned to the species of the sporophytes with which they grouped (6 _V. boschiana_, 3 _D. petersii_). The 12 remaining gametophyte samples were assigned as "Unknown" (Table 1, Figure 5). Several of the Unknown samples have low numbers of reads and loci, which may be causing them to be inconsistently assigned in the three structure runs. However two samples with large numbers of reads consistently had large proportions of their ancestry assigned to both _C. intricatum_ and _V. boschiana_, and two had large proportions assigned to both _C intricatum_ and _D. petersii_, suggesting that at least some of the Unknown samples may represent a mixture of gametophytes of more than one species or gametophytes resulting from hybridization.

Neighbor-joining Euclidean distance trees support the gametophyte species assignments based on Structure, with samples for each species grouped together (Figure 6). There is also some support for the subgroupings of Unknown samples. One clade includes all of the _D. petersii_ samples and the two Unknown samples suspected to be mixed _C. intricatum_ and _D. petersii_, and another clade contains all of the _V. boschiana_ samples and both of the samples suspected to be mixed _C. intricatum_ and _V. boschiana_. All but one of the remaining Unknown samples form a clade sister to this _V. boschiana_ clade.

Analyses of observed heterozygosity levels and deviation from Hardy Weinberg equilibrium support differences between gametophyte samples classified as different species as well. Approximately 28% of loci in _C. intricatum_ samples were not in Hardy Weinberg equilibrium, whereas only 4% of loci in Unknown samples, 2% of loci in _V. boschiana_ and none of the loci in _D. petersii_ were identified as deviating from HWE. Mean observed heterozygosity was higher in _C. intricatum_ (29%) than _D. petersii_ (12%), _V. boschiana_ (8%), or Unknown samples 12%), and this difference was statistically significant (F=33.91, df=3, p<2e-16).

## Investigating genetic variation in _C. intricatum_

### _C. intricatum_ and Unknown samples

After removing samples with less than 1 million reads, 25 _C. intricatum_ and 7 Unknown samples remained, representing 14 sites in 5 states (Figure 3).

Removing loci shared with _V. boschiana_ or _D. petersii_ samples (the "non-_Crepidomanes_ loci") did not have a large effect on the total number of loci in the filtered dataset relative to the unfiltered dataset (5% of total loci removed; Table 3), likely because even a non-_Crepidomanes_ locus present in all of the Unknown samples would not have met the 50% minimum sample coverage cutoff. Individual samples differ in the proportion of loci that were non-_Crepidomanes_ loci (Table 4), but Unknown samples have a higher mean proportion of non-_Crepidomanes_ loci than _C. intricatum_ samples do (20% vs. 4%), and this difference is statistically significant (t=3.49, df=6.13, p-value = 0.012).

Analysis of Structure K-means and Evanno's delta-K suggest that the _C. intricatum_ and Unknown samples cluster optimally into 2 groups (Figure 7; Figure 8). Structure results using the unfiltered subset at K=2 suggest that most of the Unknown samples cluster separately from the _C. intricatum_ samples (Figure 9a). Most of the _C. intricatum_ samples have the majority of their ancestry assigned to one cluster, whereas five of the seven Unknown samples have the majority of their ancestry assigned to the other cluster.  After filtering non-_Crepidomanes_ loci (Figure 9b) this apparent difference between _C. intricatum_ and Unknown samples remains. Only one of the suspected mixed samples (S07) noticeably changes ancestry assignments in a way consistent with a mixed sample having the non-_Crepidomanes_ signal removed. The other three suspected mixed samples (S13, S20, and S21) have over 99% of their ancestry assigned to the second cluster even after non-_Crepidomanes_ signal is removed. It is possible that S07 is actually a mixed sample and the others are not, but it is also possible that the attempt to bioinformatically remove non-_Crepidomanes_ genetic signal was not successful and that removing the loci present in the _V. boschiana_ and _D. petersii_ samples did not remove a large enough proportion of the non-_Crepidomanes_ signal. In either case, because we could not determine whether the Unknown samples cluster separately because of variation in _C. intricatum_ genetic signal or because of genetic signal from other species, we removed the 7 Unknown samples and focused only on the 25 _C. intricatum_ samples.

### _C. intricatum_ samples

The 25 _C. intricatum_ samples with over 1 million reads represent 12 sites in three states (Figure 3). {{That figure shows all samples--even those not included in this analysis because of low readcounts. Somehow identify which are which on the figure? Filled circles = over 1 million, open circles = fewer than 1 million?}}

Removing the non-_Crepidomanes_ loci had less effect on the _C. intricatum_ dataset than on the _C. intricatum_ + Unknown dataset, with only 2% of total loci removed (Table 3; Table 4). The results of analyses using unfiltered and filtered datasets were similar to each other and yield identical inferences, so only results for the unfiltered dataset are presented.

For the _C. intricatum_ samples the optimal number of clusters identified by Structure appears to be just one. There is no clear peak in the Evanno delta-K values (Figure 8) and estimated log likelihood values increase only slightly at low K-values before dropping at higher values (Figure 7). There is no clear geographic pattern to the ancestry assignments at K=2, with the ancestry for each sample divided between two clusters (Figure 10).

Mantel tests identified evidence of isolation by distance (r~m~=0.271, p=0.02  with 999 permutations). Using Pearson's product-moment correlation, geographic and genetic distance are correlated and this correlation is significantly different from zero (r=0.271, t=3.986, df=284, p=8.553e-05).  However, the pattern of isolation by distance is not strong (Figure 11) and there is high variation in pairwise genetic distances at all geographic scales (Figure 12).

The Neighbor-joining Euclidean distance tree (Figure 13) and the Minimum spanning network (Figure 14) support the lack of genetic structure identified by Structure and weak isolation by distance. Tip branch lengths are long relative to internal branches in the distance tree and most samples do not group geographically. Samples from the same region, site, or even the same collection do not consistently form monophyletic groups or distinct clusters. The three Western Pennsylvania samples do group together, but genetic distances between the samples (all from one site) are large.

### Evaluating the most genetically similar samples

Based on assumptions about gemmae dispersal ability and clonal growth of independent gametophyte populations, we expected that _C. intricatum_ samples from the same collection would likely be identical clones, but pairwise genetic distances of within-collection samples are not consistently among the lowest. They are generally lower than pairwise distances of samples at larger geographic scales, but span the lower half of the total range of pairwise distances (Figure 12) and in no case do sets of samples from the same collection all have their smallest genetic distances to each other.

To determine whether this high variation in genetic distances between samples that were expected to be genetically identical is because the samples really are different or is an artifact of high levels of noise relative to true genetic variation, we created a modified GBS dataset, where the within-collection samples were replaced with simulated clones generated by replacing the reads for each set of within-collection samples with an equal number of reads drawn randomly from a pool of their combined reads. This re-sampled GBS dataset was processed using ipyRAD and loci were filtered using the same settings as the original dataset.  

The distributions of all pairwise distances in the re-sampled and original datasets are similar (bimodal with similar minimum, maximum and modal distances) but the distribution of pairwise distances for the simulated clone samples differs from the original within-collection samples (Figure 15). The distances between simulated clones are lower than most of the original distances and are all in the lowest 6% of pairwise distances. Based on this, it seems likely that within-collection samples with pairwise distances far outside this range are not clones (_e.g._, S16 and S17), whereas any samples with pairwise distances in this range are so genetically similar they cannot be distinguished from clones (_e.g._, S09 and S10).

In the original dataset, the nine lowest pairwise distances are separated from the next highest distances and are among the lowest 6% of distances (Figure 16) suggesting that the eight samples involved in those pairwise distances (S09, S10, S15, S16, S43, S44, S46, S47, and S48) may represent identical clones. However not all of the pairwise comparisons between combinations of those eight samples are within the lowest 6% (8 of 28 are not in the lowest 10%) and other samples have very low pairwise distances to one of those eight samples but not to the others. So there is not a clear cutoff between samples that may be identical clones and other samples with very similar genotypes.

### Evaluating the most genetically distant samples

Several samples have pairwise genetic distances suggesting they have genotypes different from all other samples included in the analysis. 11 samples have no pairwise distances in the lowest 10% of distances (S05, S14, S17, S28, S33, S36, S37, S38, S39, S40, and S41), and 9 of those have none in the lowest 15%--all of their pairwise distances are outside the range expected for genetically identical samples ({Network figure showing all connections in the lowest 6, 10, or 15% of connections?}). The bimodal distribution of pairwise genetic distances suggests two groups of genetic distances among samples--even though there was not detectable genetic structure in other analyses--and the pairwise distances between the four most genetically distant samples (S17, S36, S37, and S39) and all other samples account for the bimodal distribution (Figure 16). These four samples have only one pairwise genetic distance in the lowest 50% of pairwise distances, and distances involving one of them are higher than most other pairwise distances between other samples. Overall, there appear to be at least five, and perhaps 10 or more different genotypes or groups of similar genotypes present in just 25 samples, including four that are quite different from the rest, and others that appear to form a gradient from somewhat different to indistinguishable.

DISCUSSION
==========

## Separating samples by species using genotyping-by-sequencing data

Analysis of the population genetics of _C. intricatum_ is complicated by the presence of other filmy fern species with partially overlapping ranges and morphologically indistinguishable gametophytes. Limitations on the amount of DNA that can be extracted from tiny amounts of gametophyte tissue and the possibility that multiple extractions from the same gametophyte collection may sample multiple genetically different individuals or even individuals of different species make it challenging to extract enough DNA to use for both species identification and for other analyses. One objective of this study was to determine whether species identification of _C. intricatum_, _V. boschiana_, and _D. petersii_ gametophytes and population genetic analyses of the gametophytes determined to be _C. intricatum_ could both be performed using a single genotyping-by-sequencing dataset.

Structure analyses and neighbor joining trees suggest that in most cases, the species of unknown gametophytes can be inferred based on how they group relative to _V. boschiana_ and _D. petersii_ sporophyte samples, and that assuming species based solely on presence or absence of sporophytes at or near a site may lead to misidentification. Seven samples were assigned a different species based on Structure grouping than what was suspected based on geographic location and proximity to sporophytes, including a sample from Georgia found growing with _D. petersii_ sporophytes that appears to be _C. intricatum_ and four samples growing without sporophytes that appear to be _V. boschiana_. Some samples with low read depths could not be unambiguously assigned to species, but four samples with high read depth appear to contain mixtures of more than one species of gametophyte or hybrid gametophytes. Two of these are not entirely unexpected--potential _C. intricatum_ and _V. boschiana_ mixtures or hybrids at Southern Illinois sites where _V. boschiana_ sporophytes are in close proximity to many _C. intricatum_ populations--but one potentially mixed or hybrid _C. intricatum_ and _D. petersii_ sample was collected in Southern Illinois, far from known _D. petersii_ sporophytes, and the other in Arkansas, where gametophytes were assumed to be _D. petersii_.

Intermingling of species in gametophyte populations and hybridization among filmy fern gametophytes have been observed in Asia [@Ebihara2009-sg] so communities of mixed species or hybridization of North American filmy ferns is possible. However, in _C. intricatum_ isozyme analyses, no evidence of individuals with hybrid banding patterns has been found [@Farrar1985-nm] and cpDNA based markers used to distinguish between North America filmy fern gametophytes [@Pinson2017-eu] are not sufficient to detect hybrids. It is also possible that the Unknown samples forming a clade sister to the _V. boschiana_ samples in the neighbor-joining tree (Figure 6) represent an additional, unidentified filmy fern species with gametophytes present in North America. Further work is needed to determine if mixed-species communities of filmy fern gametophytes, hybrid gametophytes, or even additional species exist at sites in North America, or whether these samples that appear to be mixed or hybrid gametohytes simply lack sufficient genetic signal to consistently assign them to species.

## Population genetics of _C. intricatum_

A previous attempt to explore the population genetics of _C. intricatum_ failed to find variability with isozyme markers [@Farrar1985-nm], and we failed to find sufficiently variable cpDNA markers, but genotyping-by-sequencing allowed us to identify relatively large numbers of variable loci to evaluate patterns of variation. There is genetic variability at all geographic scales. Individuals growing in contiguous patches are sometimes--but not always--genetically similar, and pairwise genetic distances also vary drastically within sites, within regions, and between regions. There is only weak evidence of isolation by distance and no clear evidence of geographic structuring of genetic variation.

The noisy nature of genotyping-by-sequencing data makes it difficult to distinguish clones from genetically similar individuals--no two samples had identical multi-locus genotypes--but eight samples from Southern Illinois may represent a regionally widespread clone or at least a widespread group of genetically similar individuals. It seems plausible that these samples represent asexual descendants of a single spore (or genetically identical spores) with different accumulated somatic mutations, whereas the remaining samples represent descendants of at least four but perhaps 11 or more genetically different spores.

Multiple genetically distant genotypes within five of the six sites represented by multiple samples suggest movement of propagules (spores or gemmae) between sites, that sites were colonized by multiple propagules with different genotypes, or that new genotypes have been generated within those sites through sexual reproduction between genetically different individuals.

Sampling depth in previously glaciated and nearby unglaciated areas is not sufficient to make statistical comparisons of diversity or determine whether they were colonized following a stepping-stone or leading-edge pattern. The sample most geographically distant from other samples (S36 in Massachusetts) is also one of the most genetically distant from other samples, but the samples in glaciated areas in Pennsylvania are not similar to samples from the nearest non-glaciated sites included in this study. Samples within the two glaciated sites with more than one collection are not genetically similar, suggesting that these previously glaciated sites were colonized by propagules from multiple sites, by multiple propagules from a diverse site, or there has been post-colonization gene flow.

{DELETE
All eight were from sites within 100km of each other, which is consistent with assumptions about limited dispersal distances of _C. intricatum_ gemmae.
/DELETE}


## Evaluation of hypotheses for establishment and maintenance of _C. intricatum_ independent gametophyte populations

Hypotheses for how independent gametophyte populations of _C. intricatum_ were established and reached their current distribution in Eastern North America (Table 4) can be categorized, first, by whether sporophytes and local spore dispersal were ever present in North America. Those hypotheses that include North American sporophytes can be further divided by when the sporophytes were in North America (anciently or recently and perhaps ongoing), and the hypotheses that do not include North American sporophytes can be divided based on when the propagules establishing the North American gametophytes populations arrived (again, anciently or recently and perhaps ongoing).

In the relatively small number of _C. intricatum_ samples included in this study we identified at least five, and perhaps 10 or more genetically distant genotypes, suggesting that the _C. intricatum_ gametophytes in North America are likely descended from many different spores. This does not seem consistent with hypotheses without spores present in North America. If _C. intricatum_ populations were established by presumably rare long-distance dispersal of spores from populations in Asia (or elsewhere outside North America) followed by only asexual reproduction, many similar genotypes could arise over time through somatic mutation but few more-distant genotypes should be present.

Even in previously glaciated areas there appear to be gametophytes descended from more than one spore within the same site, suggesting that spore dispersal into these




{DELETE?
Previous attempts to evaluate these competing hypotheses have been based on plausible yet untested assumptions (likely limited dispersal ability of gemmae), convincing yet not certain lack of evidence (failure to find sporophytes over several decades or produce them in culture), and compelling yet limited genetic data (chloroplast marker similarity to Asian _C. schmidtianum_). Here, we add information on the population genetics of _C. intricatum_ to the available evidence and re-examine the possible hypotheses.
/DELETE}

{DELETE?
What can we predict about the patterns of genetic diversity under each of these hypotheses?
Pleistocene relicts: Some unknown pattern of diversity existed anciently. After sporophytes died out and spores stopped being produced, clonal competition and genetic drift would decrease within-site diversity and increase between-site diversity, whereas gemmae dispersal would have opposite effect. Mutation would be the only source of new genotypes, they would be similar to existing ones, and most likely be found close to where they originated. Glaciated sites would likely have reduced diversity due to founder effects and be most similar to populations near the glacial boundary.
We have multiple genotypes in glaciated sites and those genotypes are different from each other and from samples from nearby sites. The NE Pennsylvania samples are each most similar to the widespread "clone" genotype in Southern Illinois--S42 in NE Penn has a genetic distance to S46 in S. Illinois that is within the range of genetic distance expected for identical clones.
Cryptic or recently extinct sporophytes: Rare sexual reproduction and spore dispersal would counteract loss of genotypes due to clonal competition and genetic drift, and increase within-site diversity. Long distance dispersal would be more likely, increasing gene flow and reducing between-site diversity. Many new genotypes could be generated sexually, they could be quite different from the parental genotypes, and they could be distributed over greater distances. Diversity in glaciated sites could vary based on frequency of spore dispersal, but might still have reduced diversity if they are at the limits of the range.
Ancient spore invasion: Patterns of diversity would depend on the number of introductions, the genetic variation present in the source, levels of gemmae dispersal post-invasion, and the mutation rate. A single introduction with subsequent asexual reproduction could lead to low levels of within and between-site diversity whereas multiple introductions from a diverse source could lead to complex patterns of variation. Diversity in glaciated sites would depend on these same factors but likely similar to that expected under the Pleistocene relicts hypothesis, since these sites would be colonized by gemmae after the ancient spore invasion.
Separation of generations: Patterns of variation would depend on the same factors as in an ancient spore invasion but with presumably fewer new genotypes generated by mutation and possibly less difference between glaciated and non-glaciated sites, since they have as much opportunity to be established by invading spores as any other site.
/DELETE}

## Caveats and limitations

Challenges encountered in this study, mostly related to the small size and intertwined growth of filmy fern gametophyes, may impact or limit inferences. Each sample contained DNA from multiple individuals, which were assumed to be clones but in some cases appear to contain multiple genotypes. Available methods for analyzing data from pools of individuals require similar amounts of DNA from each individual in a pool and similar numbers of individuals in each pool [@Anand2016-zn], which was not the case in these samples. Multiple genotypes within a sample could lead to overestimates of heterozygosity and inference of mixed genotypes that are genetically distant from both true genotypes. The difficulty of extracting sufficient DNA from tiny tissue samples also biased sampling toward larger collections from more robust (and possibly more diverse) populations and also limited geographic coverage. Additional sampling would allow better analysis of patterns of variation throughout the range, and more meaningful comparisons of diversity in previously glaciated and non-glaciated areas.

The potential inclusion of multiple genotypes within samples and insufficient geographic coverage complicate interpretation of these data, but were necessary given the limited DNA that can be extracted from a single contiguous chain of gametophyte cells and the fragmenting of individuals that occurs in preserved samples. These same challenges likely affect isozyme and cpDNA studies of filmy fern gametophytes as well, but the lower resolution of those markers reduces the impact. A method for generating highly variable markers using DNA that can be extracted from a single gametophyte, or a method for efficiently growing clonal tissue from single gametophytes or gemmae are needed to improve population genetics studies of independent fern gametophytes.


##  Conclusions and further work

Some of our expectations for genetic diversity in _C. intricatum_ under the different hypotheses are based on assumptions about the dispersal ability of gemmae relative to spores. Dispersal of asexual or vegetative propagules has been better studied in bryophytes--sporophytes are unknown for 20% of British mosses--and bryophyte propagules with size and structure comparable to _C. intricatum_ gemmae play an important role in habitat colonization and local or regional maintenance of populations [@Frey2011-uy]. Dispersal mechanisms including water, wind, and animal vectors have been demonstrated in bryophytes [@Pasiche-Lisboa2018-kz] but nothing is known about the dispersal mechanisms or ability of _C. intricatum_ gemmae or gametophyte fragments. The absence of gametophytes at recently disturbed sites like train tunnels or roadcuts suggests infrequent dispersal [@Farrar1992-pm] but it is not clear whether habitat requirements actually make those sites unsuitable. Experiments like the recent study to determine limiting factors in _V. appalachiana_ distribution [@Chambers2016-kf] could test this.

Nothing in this study addressed the question of why we do not find _C. intricatum_ sporophytes, and it is unlikely that population genetics data can provide an answer--though the presence of multiple genotypes in some populations suggests that it is not an issue of self-incompatibility in clonal populations. Further work is needed to investigate potential physiological, genetic, or epigenetic explanations for the apparent lack of sexual reproduction in _C. intricatum_.

This study provides useful information on the genetics of filmy fern independent gametophytes in Eastern North America and highlight the risks of identifying filamentous gametophytes based on geographic location and presence or absence of sporophytes--all three species included in this study may be found without sporophytes and _C. intricatum_ may be found growing with sporophytes of other filmy fern species. A contiguous patch of independent gametophytes may contain more than a single species, which is significant based on suggestions that some Asian independent gametophytes are not directly producing sporophytes, but may be contributing gametes for hybridization [@Ebihara2009-sg].

This study also provides a first look at patterns of genetic variation in _C. intricatum_ gametophyte populations, which demonstrate a lack of genetic structure, only weak evidence of isolation by distance, and genetic variation present at all geographic scales. Even within a contiguous patch of gametophytes, individuals growing intimately entwined may not be genetically identical clones.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
================
NOTE- U of U CHPC for computing resources, Zach Gompert for guidance on library prep


REFERENCES
==========
